THE PROBABILITY OF BACKTEST OVERFITTING David H. Bailey ∗ Jonathan M. Borwein † Marcos L´ opez de Prado ‡ Qiji Jim Zhu§ February 27, 2015 Revised version: February 2015 ∗Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (retired), 1 Cyclotron Road, Berke-ley, CA 94720, USA, and Research Fellow at the University of California, Davis, Department of Computer Science.
E-mail: david@davidhbailey.com; URL: http://www.davidhbailey.com †Laureate Professor of Mathematics at University of Newcastle, Callaghan NSW 2308, Australia, and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, the Australian Academy of Science, the American Mathematical Society and the AAAS. E-mail: jonathan.borwein@newcastle.edu.au; URL: http://www.carma.newcastle.edu.au/jon ‡Senior Managing Director at Guggenheim Partners, New York, NY 10017, and Re-search Aﬃliate at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
E-mail: lopezdeprado@lbl.gov; URL: http://www.QuantResearch.info §Professor, Department of Mathematics, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008, USA. Email: zhu@wmich.edu; URL: http://homepages.wmich.edu/~zhu/ 1 THE PROBABILITY OF BACKTEST OVERFITTING Abstract Many investment ﬁrms and portfolio managers rely on backtests (i.e., simulations of performance based on historical market data) to select investment strategies and allocate capital. Standard statistical techniques designed to prevent regression overﬁtting, such as hold-out, tend to be unreliable and inaccurate in the context of investment backtests.
We propose a general framework to assess the probabil-ity of backtest overﬁtting (PBO). We illustrate this framework with speciﬁc generic, model-free and nonparametric implementations in the context of investment simulations, which implementations we call com-binatorially symmetric cross-validation (CSCV). We show that CSCV produces reasonable estimates of PBO for several useful examples.
Keywords.
Backtest, historical simulation, probability of backtest over-ﬁtting, investment strategy, optimization, Sharpe ratio, minimum backtest length, performance degradation.
JEL Classiﬁcation: G0, G1, G2, G15, G24, E44.
AMS Classiﬁcation: 91G10, 91G60, 91G70, 62C, 60E.
Acknowledgements.
We are indebted to the Editor and three anony-mous referees who peer-reviewed this article as well as a related article for the Notices of the American Mathematical Society [1]. We are also grateful to Tony Anagnostakis (Moore Capital), Marco Avellaneda (Courant Institute, NYU), Peter Carr (Morgan Stanley, NYU), Paul Embrechts (ETH Z¨ urich), Matthew D. Foreman (University of California, Irvine), Ross Garon (SAC Capital), Jeﬀrey S. Lange (Guggenheim Partners), Attilio Meucci (KKR, NYU), Natalia Nolde (University of British Columbia and ETH Z¨ urich) and Riccardo Rebonato (PIMCO, University of Oxford) for many useful and stimulating exchanges.
Sponsorship.
Research supported in part by the Director, Oﬃce of Com-putational and Technology Research, Division of Mathematical, Informa-tion, and Computational Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy, under contract number DE-AC02-05CH11231 and by various Australian Research Council grants.
2 “This was our paradox: No course of action could be determined by a rule, because every course of action can be made to accord with the rule.” Ludwig Wittgenstein [36].
1 Introduction Modern investment strategies rely on the discovery of patterns that can be quantiﬁed and monetized in a systematic way. For example, algorithms can be designed to proﬁt from phenomena such as “momentum,” i.e., the ten-dency of many securities to exhibit long runs of proﬁts or losses, beyond what could be expected from securities following a martingale. One advan-tage of this systematization of investment strategies is that those algorithms are amenable to “backtesting.” A backtest is a historical simulation of how an algorithmic strategy would have performed in the past. Backtests are valuable tools because they allow researchers to evaluate the risk/reward proﬁle of an investment strategy before committing funds.
Recent advances in algorithmic research and high-performance comput-ing have made it nearly trivial to test millions and billions of alternative investment strategies on a ﬁnite dataset of ﬁnancial time series. While these advances are undoubtedly useful, they also present a negative and often si-lenced side-eﬀect: The alarming rise of false positives in related academic publications (The Economist [32]). This paper introduces a computational procedure for detecting false positives in the context of investment strategy research.
To motivate our study, consider a researcher who is investigating an al-gorithm to proﬁt from momentum. Perhaps the most popular technique among Commodity Trading Advisors (CTAs) is to use so-called crossing-moving averages to detect a change of trend in a security1. Even for the simplest case, there are at least ﬁve parameters that the researcher can ﬁt: Two sample lengths for the moving averages, entry threshold, exit threshold and stop-loss. The number of combinations that can be tested over thou-sands of securities is in the billions. For each of those billions of backtests, we could estimate its Sharpe ratio (or any other performance statistic), and determine whether that Sharpe ratio is indeed statistically signiﬁcant at a conﬁdence level of 95%. Although this approach is consistent with the Neyman-Pearson framework of hypothesis testing, it is highly likely that false positives will emerge with a probability greater than 5%. The reason 1Several technical tools are based on this principle, such as the Moving Average Con-vergence Divergence (MACD) indicator.
3 is that a 5% false positive probability only holds when we apply the test exactly once. However, we are applying the test on the same data multiple times (indeed, billions of times), making the emergence of false positives almost certain.
The core question we are asking is this: What constitutes a legitimate empirical ﬁnding in the context of investment research? This may appear to be a rather philosophical question, but it has important practical implica-tions, as we shall see later in our discussion. Financial discoveries typically involve identifying a phenomenon with low signal-to-noise ratio, where that ratio is driven down as a result of competition. Because the signal is weak, a test of hypothesis must be conducted on a large sample as a way of assess-ing the existence of a phenomenon. This is not the typical case in scientiﬁc areas where the signal-to-noise ratio is high. By way of example, consider the apparatus of classical mechanics, which was developed centuries before Neyman and Pearson proposed their theory of hypothesis testing. Newton did not require statistical testing of his gravitation theory, because the signal from that phenomenon dominates the noise.
The question of ‘legitimate empirical ﬁndings’ is particularly troubling when researchers conduct multiple tests. The probability of ﬁnding false positives increases with the number of tests conducted on the same data (Miller [25]). As each researcher carries out millions of regressions (Sala-i-Martin [28]) on a ﬁnite number of independent datasets without controlling for the increased probability of false positives, some researchers have con-cluded that ‘most published research ﬁndings are false’ (see Ioannidis [17]).
Furthermore, it is common practice to use this computational power to calibrate the parameters of an investment strategy in order to maximize its performance.
But because the signal-to-noise ratio is so weak, often the result of such calibration is that parameters are chosen to proﬁt from past noise rather than future signal. The outcome is an overﬁt backtest [1]. Scientists at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory have developed an online tool to demonstrate this phenomenon. This tool generates a time series of pseudorandom returns, and then calibrates the parameters of an optimal monthly strategy (i.e., the sequence of days of the month to be long the security, and the sequence of days of the month to be short). After a few hundred iterations, it is trivial to ﬁnd highly proﬁtable strategies in-sample, despite the small number of parameters involved. Performance out-of-sample is, of course, utterly disappointing. The tool is available at http://datagrid.lbl.gov/backtest/index.php.
Backtests published in academic or practitioners’ publications almost never declare the number of trials involved in a discovery. Because those 4 researchers have most likely not controlled for the number of trials, it is highly probable that their ﬁndings constitute false positives ([1, 3]). Even though researchers at academic and investment institutions may be aware of these problems, they have little incentive to expose them. Whether their motivations are to receive tenure or raise funds for a new systematic fund, those researchers would rather ignore this problem and make their investors or managers believe that backtest overﬁtting does not aﬀect their results.
Some may even pretend that they are controlling for overﬁtting using inap-propriate techniques, exploiting the ignorance of their sponsors, as we will see later on when discussing the ‘hold-out’ method.
The goal of our paper is to develop computational techniques to control for the increased probability of false positives as the number of trials in-creases, applied to the particular ﬁeld of investment strategy research. For instance, journal editors and investors could demand researchers to estimate that probability when a backtest is submitted to them.
Our approach.
First, we introduce a precise characterization of the event of backtest overﬁtting. The idea is simple and intuitive: For overﬁtting to occur, the strategy conﬁguration that delivers maximum performance in sample (IS) must systematically underperform the remaining conﬁgurations out of sample (OOS). Typically the principal reason for this underperfor-mance is that the IS “optimal” strategy is so closely tied to the noise con-tained in the training set that further optimization of the strategy becomes pointless or even detrimental for the purpose of extracting the signal.
Second, we establish a general framework for assessing the probability of the event of backtest overﬁtting. We model this phenomenon of backtest overﬁtting using an abstract probability space in which the sample space consist of pairs of IS and OOS test results.
Third, we set as null hypothesis that backtest overﬁtting has indeed taken place, and develop an algorithm that tests for this hypothesis. For a given strategy, the probability of backtest overﬁtting (PBO) is then eval-uated as the conditional probability that this strategy underperforms the median OOS while remaining optimal IS. While the PBO provides a direct way to quantify the likelihood of backtest overﬁtting, the general framework also aﬀords us information to look into the overﬁtting issue from diﬀerent perspectives. For example, besides PBO, this framework can also be used to assess performance decay, probability of loss, and possible stochastic domi-nance of a strategy.
It is worth clarifying in what sense do we speak of a probability of back-5 test overﬁtting. Backtest overﬁtting is a deterministic fact (either the model is overﬁt or it is not), hence it may seem unnatural to associate a probability to a non-random event. Given some empirical evidence and priors, we can infer the posterior probability that overﬁtting has taken place. Examples of this line of reasoning abound in information theory and machine learning treatises, e.g. [23]. It is in this Bayesian sense that we deﬁne and estimate PBO.
A generic, model-free, and nonparametric testing algorithm is desirable, since backtests are applied to trading strategies produced using a great va-riety of diﬀerent methods and models. For this reason, we present a speciﬁc implementation, which we call a combinatorially symmetric cross-validation (CSCV). We show that CSCV produces reasonable estimates of PBO for several useful examples.
Our CSCV implementation draws from elements in experimental math-ematics, information theory, Bayesian inference, machine learning and deci-sion theory to address the very particular problem of assessing the represen-tativeness of a backtest. This is not an easy problem, as evidenced by the scarcity of academic papers addressing a dilemma that most investors face.
This gap in the literature is disturbing, given the heavy reliance on backtests among practitioners. One advantage of our solution is that it only requires time series of backtested performance. We avoid the credibility issue of pre-serving a truly out-of-sample test-set by not requiring a ﬁxed “hold-out,” and swapping all in-sample (IS) and out-of-sample (OOS) datasets. Our approach is generic in the sense of not requiring knowledge of either the trading rule or forecasting equation. The output is a bootstrapped distribu-tion of OOS performance measure. Although in our examples we measure performance using the Sharpe ratio, our methodology does not rely on this particular performance statistic, and it can be applied to any alternative preferred by the reader.
We emphasize that the CSCV implementation is only one illustrative technique. The general framework is ﬂexible enough to accommodate other task-speciﬁc methods for estimating the PBO.
Comparisons to other approaches.
Perhaps the most common ap-proach to prevent overﬁtting among practitioners is to require the researcher to withhold a portion of the available data sample for separate testing and validation as OOS performance (this is known as the “hold-out” or “test set” method). If the IS and OOS performance levels are congruent, the in-vestor might decide to “reject” the hypothesis that the backtest is overﬁt.
6 The main advantage of this procedure is its simplicity. This approach is, however, unsatisfactory for multiple reasons.
First, if the data is publicly available, it is quite likely that the researcher has used the “hold-out” as part of the IS dataset. Second, even if no “hold-out” data was used, any seasoned researcher knows well how ﬁnancial vari-ables performed over the time period covered by the OOS dataset, and that information may well be used in the strategy design, consciously or not (see Schorfheide and Wolpin [29]).
Third, hold-out is clearly inadequate for small samples—the IS dataset will be too short to ﬁt, and the OOS dataset too short to conclude anything with suﬃcient conﬁdence. Weiss and Kulikowski [34] argue that hold-out should not be applied to an analysis with less than 1, 000 observations. For example, if a strategy trades on a weekly basis, hold-out should not be used on backtests of less than 20 years. Along the same lines, Van Belle and Kerr [33] point out the high variance of hold-out estimation errors. If one is unlucky, the chosen hold-out section may be the one that refutes a valid strategy or supports an invalid strategy. Diﬀerent hold-outs are thus likely to lead to diﬀerent conclusions.
Fourth, even if the researcher works with a large sample, the OOS anal-ysis will need to consume a large proportion of the sample to be conclusive, which is detrimental to the strategy’s design (see Hawkins [15]). If the OOS is taken from the end of a time series, we are losing the most recent obser-vations, which often are the most representative going forward. If the OOS is taken from the beginning of the time series, the testing has been done on arguably the least representative portion of the data.
Fifth, as long as the researcher tries more than one strategy conﬁgura-tion, overﬁtting is always present (see Bailey et al. [1] for a proof). The hold-out method does not take into account the number of trials attempted before selecting a particular strategy conﬁguration, and consequently hold-out cannot correctly assess a backtest’s representativeness.
In short, the hold-out method leaves the investor guessing to what degree the backtest is overﬁt. The answer to the question “is this backtest overﬁt?” is not a true-or-false, but a non-null probability that depends on the number of trials involved (input ignored by hold-out). In this paper we will present a way to compute this probability.
Another approach popular among practitioners consists in modeling the underlying ﬁnancial variable by generating pseudorandom scenarios and measuring the performance of the resulting investment strategy for those scenarios (see Carr and L´ opez de Prado [6] for a valid application of this technique). This approach has the advantage of generating a distribution of 7 outcomes, rather than relying on a single OOS performance estimate, as the “hold-out” method does. The disadvantages are that the model that gener-ates random series of the underlying variable may also be overﬁt, or may not contain all relevant statistical features, and may need to be customized to every variable (with large development costs). Some retail trading platforms oﬀer backtesting procedures based on this approach, such as by pseudoran-dom generation of tick data by fractal interpolation.
Several procedures have been proposed to determine whether an econo-metric model is overﬁt.
See White [35], Romano et al.
[27], Harvey et al. [13] for a discussion in the context of Econometric models. Essentially these methods propose a way to adjust the p-values of estimated regression coeﬃcients to account for the multiplicity of trials. These are valuable ap-proaches when the trading rule relies on an econometric speciﬁcation. That is not generally the case, as discussed in Bailey et al. [1]. Investment strate-gies in general are not amenable to characterization through a system of algebraic equations. Regression-tree decision making, for example, requires a hierarchy that only combinatorial frameworks like graph theory can pro-vide, and which are beyond the geometric arguments used in econometric models (see Calkin and L´ opez de Prado [4, 5]). On the other hand, the approach proposed here shares the same philosophy in that both are trying to assess the probability of overﬁtting.
Structure of the paper.
The rest of the study is organized as follows: Section 2 sets the foundations of our framework: we describe our general framework for the backtest overﬁtting probability in Subsection 2.1 and present the CSCV method for estimate this probability in Subsection 2.2.
Section 3 discusses other ways that our general framework can be used to assess a backtest. Section 4 further discusses some of the features of the CSCV method, and how it relates to other machine learning methods. Sec-tion 5 lists some of the limitations of this method. Section 6 discusses a practical application, and Section 7 summarizes our conclusions. We have carried out several test cases to illustrate how the PBO compares to diﬀer-ent scenarios, and to assess the accuracy of our method using two alterna-tive approaches (Monte Carlo Methods and Extreme Value Theory). The interested reader can ﬁnd the details of those studies following this link: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2568435 8 2 The framework 2.1 Definition of overfitting in the context of strategy selection We ﬁrst establish a measure theoretic framework in which the probability of backtest overﬁtting and other statistics related to the issue of overﬁtting can be rigorously deﬁned. Consider a probability space (T , F, Prob) where T represents a sample space of pairs of IS and OOS samples. We aim at estimating the probability of overﬁtting for the following backtest strategy selection process: select from N strategies labeled as (1, 2, . . . , N) the ‘best’ one using backtesting according to a given performance measure, say, the Sharpe ratio. Fixing a performance measure, we will use random vectors R = (R1, R2, . . . , RN) and R = (R1, R2, . . . , RN) on (T , F, Prob) to rep-resent the IS and OOS performance of the N strategies, respectively. For a given sample c ∈T , that is a concrete pair of IS and OOS samples, we will use Rc and R c to signify the performances of the N strategies on the IS and OOS pair given by c. For most applications T will be ﬁnite and one can choose to use the power set T as F. Moreover, often it makes sense in this case to assume that the Prob is uniform on elements in T . However, we do not make speciﬁc assumptions at this stage of general discussion so as to allow ﬂexibility in particular applications.
The key observation here is to compare the ranking of the selected strate-gies IS and OOS. Therefore we consider the ranking space Ωconsists of the N! permutations of (1, 2, . . . , N) indicating the ranking of the N strategies.
Then we use random vectors r, ¯ r to represent the ranking of the components of R, R, respectively. For example, if N = 3 and the performance measure is the Sharpe ratio, for a particular sample c ∈T , Rc = (0.5, 1.1, 0.7) and R c = (0.6, 0.7, 1.3), then we have rc = (1, 3, 2) and ¯ rc = (1, 2, 3). Thus, both r and ¯ r are random vectors mapping (T , F, Prob) to Ω.
Now, we deﬁne backtest overﬁtting, in the context of investment strategy selection alluded to above. We will need to use the following subset of Ω: Ω∗ n = {f ∈Ω| fn = N}.
Deﬁnition 2.1. (Backtest Overﬁtting) We say that the backtest strategy selection process overﬁts if a strategy with optimal performance IS has an expected ranking below the median OOS. By the Bayesian formula and using the notation above that is N X n=1 E[rn | r ∈Ω∗ n]Prob[r ∈Ω∗ n] ≤N/2.
(2.1) 9 Deﬁnition 2.2. (Probability of Backtest Overﬁtting) A strategy with op-timal performance IS is not necessarily optimal OOS. Moreover, there is a non-null probability that this strategy with optimal performance IS ranks be-low the median OOS. This is what we deﬁne as the probability of backtest overﬁt (PBO). More precisely, PBO = N X n=1 Prob[rn < N/2 | r ∈Ω∗ n]Prob[r ∈Ω∗ n].
(2.2) In other words, we say that a strategy selection process overﬁts if the expected performance of the strategies selected IS is less than the median performance rank OOS of all strategies. In that situation, the strategy se-lection process becomes in fact detrimental. Note that in this context IS corresponds to the subset of observations used to select the optimal strat-egy among the N alternatives.
With IS we do not mean the period on which the investment model underlying the strategy was estimated (e.g., the period on which crossing moving averages are computed, or a forecast-ing regression model is estimated). Consequently, in the above deﬁnition we refer to overﬁtting in relation to the strategy selection process, not a strategy’s model calibration (e.g., in the context of regressions). That is the reason we were able to deﬁne overﬁtting without knowledge of the strategy’s underlying models, i.e., in a model-free and non-parametric manner.
2.2 The CSCV procedure The framework Subsection 2.1 is ﬂexible in dealing with the probability of backtest overﬁtting and other statistical characterizations related to the issue of overﬁtting. However, in order to quantify say the PBO for con-crete applications we need a method to estimate the probability that was abstractly deﬁned in the previous section. Estimating the probability in a particular application relies on schemes for selecting samples of IS and OOS pairs. This section is devoted to establishing such a procedure, which we name combinatorially symmetric cross-validation, abbreviated as (CSCV) for convenience of reference.
Suppose that a researcher is developing an investment strategy. She con-siders a family of system speciﬁcations and parametric values to be back-tested, in an attempt to uncover the most proﬁtable incarnation of that idea. For example, in a trend-following moving average strategy, the re-searcher might try alternative sample lengths on which the moving averages are computed, entry thresholds, exit thresholds, stop losses, holding periods, 10 sampling frequencies, and so on. As a result, the researcher ends up running a number N of alternative model conﬁgurations (or trials), out of which one is chosen according to some performance evaluation criterion, such as the Sharpe ratio.
Algorithm 2.3 (CSCV). We proceed as follows.
First, we form a matrix M by collecting the performance series from the N trials. In particular, each column n = 1, . . . , N represents a vector of proﬁts and losses over t = 1, . . . , T observations associated with a particular model conﬁguration tried by the researcher. M is therefore a real-valued matrix of order (T × N). The only conditions we impose are that: i) M is a true matrix, i.e. with the same number of rows for each column, where observations are synchronous for every row across the N trials, and ii) the performance evaluation metric used to choose the “optimal” strat-egy can be estimated on subsamples of each column.
For example, if that metric was the Sharpe ratio, we would expect that the IID Normal distribution assumption could be maintained on various slices of the reported performance. If diﬀerent model conﬁgurations trade with diﬀerent frequencies, observations should be aggregated to match a common index t = 1, . . . , T.
Second, we partition M across rows, into an even number S of disjoint submatrices of equal dimensions. Each of these submatrices Ms, with s = 1, . . . , S, is of order (T/S × N).
Third, we form all combinations CS of Ms, taken in groups of size S/2.
This gives a total number of combinations  S S/2  =  S −1 S/2 −1  S S/2 = . . . = S/2−1 Y i=0 S −i S/2 −i (2.3) For instance, if S = 16, we will form 12, 780 combinations. Each combination c ∈CS is composed of S/2 submatrices Ms.
Fourth, for each combination c ∈CS, we: a) Form the training set J, by joining the S/2 submatrices Ms that con-stitute c in their original order. J is a matrix of order (T/S)(S/2) × N) = T/2 × N.
11 b) Form the testing set J, as the complement of J in M. In other words, J is the T/2 × N matrix formed by all rows of M that are not part of J also in their original order. (The order in forming J and J does not matter for some performance measures such as the Sharpe ratio but does matter for others e.g. return maximum drawdown ratio).
c) Form a vector Rc of performance statistics of order N, where the nth component Rc n of Rc reports the performance associated with the nth column of J (the testing set). As before rank of the components of Rc is denoted by rc the IS ranking of the N strategies.
d) Repeat c) with J replaced by J (the test set) to derive R c and ¯ rc the OOS performance statistics and rank of the N strategies, respectively.
e) Determine the element n∗such that rc n∗∈Ω∗ n∗. In other words, n∗is the best performing strategy IS.
f) Deﬁne the relative rank of ¯ rc n∗by ¯ ωc := ¯ rc n∗/(N + 1) ∈(0, 1). This is the relative rank of the OOS performance associated with the strategy chosen IS. If the strategy optimization procedure is not overﬁtting, we should observe that ¯ rc n∗systematically outperforms OOS, just as rc n∗ outperformed IS.
g) We deﬁne the logit λc = ln ¯ ωc (1−¯ ωc). High logit values imply a consis-tency between IS and OOS performances, which indicates a low level of backtest overﬁtting.
Fifth, we compute the distribution of ranks OOS by collecting all the λc, for c ∈CS. Deﬁne the relative frequency at which λ occurred across all CS by f(λ) = X c∈CS χ{λ}(λc) #(CS) , (2.4) where χ is the characterization function and #(CS) signiﬁes the number of elements in CS. Then R ∞ −∞f(λ)dλ = 1. This concludes the procedure.
Figure 1 schematically represents how the combinations in CS are used to produce training and testing sets, where S = 4. It shows the six combi-nations of four subsamples A, B, C, D, grouped in two subsets of size two.
The ﬁrst subset is the training set (or in-sample). This is used to deter-mine the optimal model conﬁguration. The second subset is the testing set (or out-of-sample), on which the in-sample optimal model conﬁguration is 12 Figure 1: Generating the CS symmetric combination.
tested. Running the N model conﬁgurations over each of these combinations allows us to derive a relative ranking, expressed as a logit. The outcome is a distribution of logits, one per combination. Note that each training sub-set combination is re-used as a testing subset and vice-versa (as is possible because we split the data in two equal parts).
3 Overfit statistics The framework introduced in Section 2 allows us to characterize the relia-bility of a strategy’s backtest in terms of four complementary analysis: 1. Probability of Backtest Overﬁtting (PBO): The probability that the model conﬁguration selected as optimal IS will underperform the me-dian of the N model conﬁgurations OOS.
2. Performance degradation: This determines to what extent greater per-formance IS leads to lower performance OOS, an occurrence associated with the memory eﬀects discussed in Bailey et al. [1].
3. Probability of loss: The probability that the model selected as optimal IS will deliver a loss OOS.
4. Stochastic dominance: This analysis determines whether the proce-dure used to select a strategy IS is preferable to randomly choosing one model conﬁguration among the N alternatives.
3.1 Probability of backtest overfitting (PBO) The PBO deﬁned in Section 2.1 may now be estimated using the CSCV method with φ = R 0 −∞f(λ)dλ. This represents the rate at which optimal IS strategies underperform the median of the OOS trials. The analogue of ¯ r in 13 medical research is the placebo given to a portion of patients in the test set.

[... middle omitted — see footer ...]

Figure 10 plots the random series, as well as the performance associated with the optimal parameter combination: Entry day = 1, Holding period = 4, Stop loss = -10 and Side = 1. The annualized Sharpe ratio at 1.54 is similar to the previous (overﬁt) case (1.54 vs. 1.3).
The next three graphs report the results of the CSCV analysis, which conﬁrm the validity of this backtest in the sense that performance inﬂation from overﬁtting is minimal. Figure 11 shows only 13% of the OOS SR to be negative. Because there is a real monthly eﬀect in the data, the PBO for 26 Figure 7: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 1): Performance degradation.
this second case should be substantially lower than the PBO of the ﬁrst case.
Figure 12 shows a distribution of logits with a PBO of only 13%. Figure 13 evidences that the distribution of OOS SR from IS optimal combinations clearly dominates the overall distribution of OOS SR. The CSCV analysis has this time correctly recognized the validity of this backtest, in the sense that performance inﬂation from overﬁtting is small.
In this practical application we have illustrated how simple is to produce overﬁt backtests when answering common investment questions, such as the presence of seasonal eﬀects. We refer the reader to [1, Appendix 4] for the implementation of this experiment in Python language. Similar experiments can be designed to demonstrate overﬁtting in the context of other eﬀects, such as trend-following, momentum, mean-reversion, event-driven eﬀects, and the like. Given the facility with which elevated Sharpe ratios can be manufactured IS, the reader would be well advised to remain critical of backtests and researchers that fail to report the PBO results.
27 Figure 8: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 1): logit distrubution.
7 Conclusions In [2] Bailey and L´ opez de Prado developed methodologies to evaluate the probability that a Sharpe ratio is inﬂated (PSR), and to determine the minimum track record length (MinTRL) required for a Sharpe ratio to be statistically signiﬁcant.
These statistics were developed to assess Sharpe ratios based on live investment performance and backtest track records. This paper has extended this approach to present formulas and approximation techniques for ﬁnding the probability of backtest overﬁtting.
To that end, we have proposed a general framework for modeling the IS and OOS performance using probability. We deﬁne the probability of backtested overﬁtting (PBO) as the probability that an optimal strategy IS underperforms the mean OOS. To facilitate the evaluation of PBO for par-ticular applications, we have proposed a combinatorially symmetric cross-validation (CSCV) implementation framework for estimating this probabil-ity. This estimate is generic, symmetric, model-free and non-parametric.
We have assessed the accuracy of CSCV as an approximation of PBO in 28 Figure 9: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 1): Absent of dominance.
two diﬀerent ways, on a wide variety of test cases. Monte Carlo simula-tions show that CSCV applied on a single dataset provides similar results to computing PBO on a large number of independent samples. We have also directly computed PBO by deriving the Extreme Value distributions that model the performance of IS optimal strategies. These results indicate that CSCV provides reasonable estimates of PBO, with relatively small errors.
Besides estimating PBO, our general framework and its CSCV imple-mentation scheme can also be used to deal with other issues related to overﬁtting, such as performance degeneration, probability of loss and pos-sible stochastic dominance of a strategy.
On the other hand, the CSCV implementation also has some limitations. This suggests that other imple-mentation frameworks may well be more suitable, particularly for problems with structure information.
Nevertheless, we believe that CSCV provides both a new and powerful tool in the arsenal of an investment and ﬁnancial researcher, and that it also 29 Figure 10: Backtested performance of a seasonal strategy (example 2).
constitutes a nice illustration of our general framework for quantitatively studying issues related to backtest overﬁtting. We certainly hope that this study will raise greater awareness concerning the futility of computing and reporting backtest results, without ﬁrst controlling for PBO and MinBTL.
References [1] Bailey, D., J. Borwein, M. L´ opez de Prado and J. Zhu, “Pseudo-mathematics and ﬁnancial charlatanism: The eﬀects of backtest over ﬁtting on out-of-sample performance,” Notices of the AMS, 61 May (2014), 458–471. Online at http: //www.ams.org/notices/201405/rnoti-p458.pdf.
[2] Bailey, D. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “The Sharpe Ratio Eﬃcient Frontier,” Journal of Risk, 15(2012), 3–44. Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1821643.
[3] Bailey, D. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “The Deﬂated Sharpe Ratio: Correcting for Selection Bias, Backtest Overﬁtting and Non-Normality”, Journal of Portfolio Man-agement, 40 (5) (2014), 94-107.
[4] Calkin, N. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “Stochastic Flow Diagrams”, Algorithmic Fi-nance, 3(1-2) (2014) Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2379314.
30 Figure 11: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 2): monthly eﬀect.
[5] Calkin, N. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “The Topology of Macro Financial Flows: An Ap-plication of Stochastic Flow Diagrams”, Algorithmic Finance, 3(1-2) (2014). Avail-able at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2379319.
[6] Carr, P. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “Determining Optimal Trading Rules without Backtesting”, (2014) Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.1159.
[7] Doyle, J. and C. Chen, “The wandering weekday eﬀect in major stock markets,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 33 (2009), 1388–1399.
[8] Embrechts, P., C. Klueppelberg and T. Mikosch, Modelling Extremal Events, Springer Verlag, New York, 2003.
[9] Feynman, R., The Character of Physical Law, 1964, The MIT Press.
[10] Gelman, A. and J. Hill, Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models, 2006, Cambridge University Press, First Edition.
[11] Hadar, J. and W. Russell, “Rules for Ordering Uncertain Prospects,” American Economic Review, 59 (1969), 25–34.
[12] Harris, L., Trading snf Exchanges: Market Microstructure for Practitioners, Oxford University Press, 2003.
31 Figure 12: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 2): logit distribution.
[13] Harvey, C. and Y. Liu, “Backtesting”, SSRN, working paper, 2013. Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2345489.
[14] Harvey, C., Y. Liu and H. Zhu, “...and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” SSRN, 2013. Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_ id=2249314.
[15] Hawkins, D., “The problem of overﬁtting,” Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Science, 44 (2004), 10–12.
[16] Hirsch, Y., Don’t Sell Stocks on Monday, Penguin Books, 1st Edition, 1987.
[17] Ioannidis, J.P.A., “Why most published research ﬁndings are false.” PloS Medicine, Vol. 2, No. 8,(2005) 696-701.
[18] Leinweber, D. and K. Sisk,“Event Driven Trading and the ‘New News’,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 38(2011), 110–124.
[19] Leontief, W., “Academic Economics”, Science, 9 Jul 1982, 104–107.
[20] Lo, A., “The Statistics of Sharpe Ratios,” Financial Analysts Journal, 58 (2002), July/August.
32 Figure 13: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 2): dominance.
[21] L´ opez de Prado, M. and A. Peijan, “Measuring the Loss Potential of Hedge Fund Strategies,” Journal of Alternative Investments, 7 (2004), 7–31. Available at http: //ssrn.com/abstract=641702.
[22] L´ opez de Prado, M. and M. Foreman, ”A Mixture of Gaussians Approach to Math-ematical Portfolio Oversight: The EF3M Algorithm”, Quantitative Finance, forth-coming, 2014. Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1931734.
[23] MacKay, D.J.C. “Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms”, Cam-bridge University Press, First Edition, 2003.
[24] Mayer, J., K. Khairy and J. Howard, “Drawing an Elephant with Four Complex Parameters,” American Journal of Physics, 78 (2010), 648–649.
[25] Miller, R.G., Simultaneous Statistical Inference, 2nd Ed. Springer Verlag, New York, 1981. ISBN 0-387-90548-0.
[26] Resnick, S., Extreme Values, Regular Variation and Point Processes, Springer, 1987.
[27] Romano, J. and M. Wolf, “Stepwise multiple testing as formalized data snooping”, Econometrica, 73 (2005), 1273–1282.
33 [28] Sala-i-Martin, X., “I just ran two million regressions.” American Economic Review.
87(2), May (1997).
[29] Schorfheide, F. and K. Wolpin, “On the Use of Holdout Samples for Model Selec-tion,” American Economic Review, 102 (2012), 477–481.
[30] Stodden, V., Bailey, D., Borwein, J., LeVeque, R, Rider, W. and Stein, W., “Set-ting the default to reproducible: Reproduciblity in computational and experimen-tal mathematics,” February, 2013. Available at http://www.davidhbailey.com/ dhbpapers/icerm-report.pdf.
[31] Strathern, M., “Improving Ratings: Audit in the British University System,” Euro-pean Review, 5, (1997) pp. 305-308.
[32] The Economist, “Trouble at the lab”, Oct.
2013 Available at http://www.economist.com/news/brieﬁng/21588057 -scientists -think-science-self -correcting-alarming-degree-it-not-trouble.
[33] Van Belle, G. and K. Kerr, Design and Analysis of Experiments in the Health Sci-ences, John Wiley and Sons, 2012.
[34] Weiss, S. and C. Kulikowski, Computer Systems That Learn: Classiﬁcation and Pre-diction Methods from Statistics, Neural Nets, Machine Learning and Expert Systems, Morgan Kaufman, 1st Edition, 1990.
[35] White, H., “A Reality Check for Data Snooping,” Econometrica, 68 (2000), 1097– 1126.
[36] Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical Investigations, 1953. Blackwell Publishing. Section 201.
34

──────── [TRUNCATED] ────────
Showing 29,589 chars (head) + 9,845 chars (tail) of 64,135 total clean characters.
Full text saved to: C:\Users\thaqi\AppData\Local\hermes\cache\web\www.davidhbailey.com-915fd7ab2c.md
To read the omitted middle: read_file path="C:\Users\thaqi\AppData\Local\hermes\cache\web\www.davidhbailey.com-915fd7ab2c.md" offset=80 limit=200  (the file is the complete page; raise/lower offset to page through it).
─────────────────────────────